Thank you!

And congratulations champions!

I am really, really thrilled to be here.

Thank you President Coleman.

Thank you Regents for this extraordinary honor.

I am just thrilled to be in this place at
this time.

And I want to start off by telling you that
simply being here is incredibly personal for

me.

You see, not only was the foundation for most
of my life conceived in this town, I myself

was likely conceived in this town.

Best bet is the 17th floor of the University
Towers, though no one is talking for sure,

it has been 43 years.

It's the most amazing story though.

My mom was driving through this town of Ann
Arbor; it was the mid-1960s.

She was a newcomer to this town and to this
country.

It was a test for her in many ways and a test
for the people of Ann Arbor as well.

One young man in particular.

My mom was just a passerby with no idea how
much her life was about to change.

Ann Arbor wasn’t a city that she even knew,
and almost by sheer cosmic will her car breaks

down.

Now, let me paint you a picture.

She is an immigrant from the other side of
the world, undaunted, but also a little overwhelmed.

There are no cellphones, no Internet, no friends,
and really no obvious options, very little

money and just a broken down car.

She went to the closest phone booth, and decided
to randomly call someone, an Indian person

whose name began in the As.

Smart woman.

I am not certain how far through the phonebook
she would have actually gone, but turns out

that was a moot point, because someone answered
the phone after the first ring.

Now, as it turns out the person she was trying
to call wasn't home, but his roommate, her

future husband, my father, was.

I can only imagine how that conversation went.

If there was ever a damsel in distress story,
this was it.

My dad, who graduated from the University
of Michigan Engineering School in 1967, was

perhaps the perfect person to help her.

You see, he loved cars and he loved the car
that my mom was driving, a 63 Nova, but as

we learned, he loved the woman driving it
even more.

It is personal for me to be here, because
my own parents met in this town, just a year

or two older than you are now, wild-eyed with
ambition and promise and impetuous and youth,

dreamers they were, as so many of you are
now, in search of something they never believed

they could have, but they still wanted it.

Even today in too many places around the world,
there is too much persecution and prosecution.

People don't dare dream of a free society,
let alone a free education, free of rules

and stipulations.

People don't dare dream of the opportunity
to learn simply for the sake of being a more

engaged global citizen.

In many places, people don't dare dream of
living, instead of just existing.

My parents came here in search of a dream
and have asked me to honor their dreams by

simply doing my very best.

Never letting a day of my life go wasted and
waking up every morning with a sense of purpose.

They taught me something else that I would
like to share with all of you.

Lesson #1, always respect your elders.

There is no doubt that our parents seem to
go smarter as we grow older, but truth is

they also sacrifice an incredible amount to
allow our lives to be what they are, and it

is on their shoulders that we realize our
greatest triumphs.

My parents are here today.

I want to thank my parents and I want to ask
all of you to do the same.

Thank your parents, your loved ones, your
friends, your family, all the people that

were here with you in many ways, worrying
about you, worrying about your safety, worrying

about to exams, maybe worrying about those
tuition bills, worrying perhaps that you were

homesick, and that you missed them, while
all the time they were missing you.

Worrying as my parents did that I would be
just another face in the crowd unwilling or

unable to realize my legacy.

Maybe worrying one day they would get a call
they didn’t want, perhaps from President

Coleman, or maybe even the Ann Arbor police.

Sorry about that mom and dad.

(00:05:05)

Michigan graduates, I come here with the full
knowledge that I am but a formality in an

otherwise very busy, important, monumental
day, so I want to do something for you that

you may otherwise forget to do; something
I wished I had started doing earlier in my

own life.

I want you to right now, just take a moment;
just stop, reflect, and take it all in.

Take all of this in.

We do not think of our lives in a linear way.

If I ask you to tell me about your days as
a University student, it's unlikely you would

start at the beginning and describe every
moment all the way to the end.

We remember series of moments, memorable moments;
and together these moments make up the meshwork

of our lives.

So lesson #2 graduates, make each moment count.

Don’t deprive yourself.

Don’t impose too many rules.

Every now and then eat a real omelet or a
Raisin French Toast at Angelo's, and when

you do, enjoy every last bite.

Have real ice cream at Stucchi's, and know
that you are indulging and savor it.

And graduates, if beer is your thing, drink
a real beer at Ashley's, and if I see you

out tonight, I will even buy you one.

Recognize the moments, graduates, as they
are happening and make them memorable, make

moments like this count.

They make up the meshwork of your lives.

I had a moment just a couple of weeks ago.

I was driving around in my car with one of
my daughters on a nice spring day.

She was in the backseat in her booster chair,
and I was watching her in the rearview mirror,

imagining and wondering what life had in store
for her.

Suddenly she picked up my stethoscope and
she started playing with it.

She is just five-years-old.

I watched her closely, just very excited as
I thought this was the moment that she decided

she wanted to be a doctor.

I was going to describe this moment for years
to come.

She put the stethoscope in her ears and she
started playing with it, and slowly brought

the little piece up to her mouth, and finally
she said, welcome to McDonald’s!

Can I take your order?

The moments aren’t always what you expect,
but it means so much to me to be invited back

into your house, your very, very, very big
house.

I love this place so much!

I have literally traveled all over the world,
to every continent, more than 100 countries,

and I love this place most of all.

I love walking around this campus.

I love the architecture of the buildings.

I love the old growth trees.

I love the restaurants and bars.

I love the conversations taking place on campus
corners every time you visit.

I love the relationship between the University
of Michigan and the City of Ann Arbor, and

I love all of you.

Now, admittedly, since I left Michigan, you
have had three Presidents, the First Lady,

and the Head of the United Nations as your
commencement speakers, not bad, but I had

something none of them did.

I am a true Blue Wolverine.

I am one of you, and I am at home today in
front of you.

My understanding is there is about 50,000
of you out there, which is a bigger audience

than we sometimes get on CNN, seriously.

This really is my home though, and it was
here that I started to learn what other people

have spoken about, the Michigan tradition.

It was here that I learned what it means when
we sing Hail to the Champions, when we sing

Hail to Leaders and Best, and what it means
to be a Wolverine.

It's a Michigan tradition, not just of excellence
and scholastic achievement, but excellence

in life.

It's a Michigan tradition to take risks and
in the process blaze new trails.

It's a Michigan tradition to always read the
directions, but not always to follow them.

It's to always prepare, but to sometimes throw
that preparation in the trash and allow yourself

to be surprised, honest, and genuine.

It's a Michigan tradition to make history
and change the world, to be immortal, not

as in living forever, but as in never being
forgotten.

It's a Michigan tradition to above all else
be a good and charitable citizen of the world,

who never gets ahead by pushing someone else
down, never, ever.

It's a Michigan tradition to be a true Blue
Wolverine, and to recognize that from this

day forward, lesson #3, if you ever cheer
for another team in competition with the Wolverines,

then some 500,000 alumni will hunt you down,
find you, and paint you maize and blue.

And by the way, if your future significant
other doesn’t understand your zealotry,

bring them here to this very big house.

(00:10:02)

So what does it mean to be a champion?

What does it take to be the Leaders and Best?

They are people who learn from their mistakes.

I guarantee you they are not people who don't
make them.

Infallibility is not a virtue.

They are not people who always know the right
answers, but they know how to ask the right

questions and are never embarrassed to do
so.

They never shy away from obstacles and instead
show tremendous resilience in the face of

these barriers, with the full recognition
that we sore highest only when truly challenged.

Also lesson #4 graduates, in the immortal
words of Oscar Wilde, champions always forgive

their enemies, because nothing annoys them
more.

Life moves fast graduates.

It's hard to believe that it has been more
than 20 years since I sat where you are now.

I started asking myself a question many years
ago at a time when I was covering a war in

a faraway land.

It was in the middle of the shamal sandstorm
in Iraq and it was a day when we could not

see our hands in front of our face.

It was a day when we lost all of our air protective
cover.

It was a day that suddenly turned into night.

And I still remember this young lieutenant
came running into our dusty desert tent.

We are being overrun.

I still hear his voice in my head and I still
hear those shots that were so close.

People started writing letters, they started
writing notes, anything to be remembered in

case they died.

And I was told to do the same thing, write
the letter, put it all down on paper, make

it count.

So I ask you graduates, right now, could you
write the letter, to whom would you write,

what would you say, summarize your life in
a few short moments near its end.

I don't know what you would write and maybe
you have never thought two seconds about it,

but lesson #5 graduates, make sure you can
write this sentence, I am who I always wanted

to be.

Today you may be a little scared and you may
be kicking yourself for feeling that way,

but don't.

The truth is I like to be scared, just a little
bit.

I have been shot at, I have been beaten, I
have been starved, I have been humiliated,

and all of that was just from my wife after
our last boys’ weekend away.

My wife is here as well.

She is the source of many of these lessons.

No surprise, after all I married a Wolverine.

I think being scared is good, and I think
to get the corollary is also true, never being

scared is bad.

Too safe, too careful, not enough risk, not
enough living, too much talking, not enough

action.

I like to live on the border of being pushed
harder than ever, doing the best work I have

ever done, and being completely out of control.

I learned when I was around your age that
was the sweet spot for me.

Now, I am not talking about playing games
with your life.

I am talking about imagining things you never
thought possible.

I am talking about savoring it.

When someone tells you, no, it can't be done,
because you know deep down you now have an

opportunity to do the impossible.

I have been told no more times than I can
count.

I was too small.

I was too dumb.

I stammered too much.

I lacked talent.

I was incapable of understanding.

I was socially awkward.

I had too much of a Midwestern accent, and
I sure did have a funny sounding name.

I spoke too slowly I was told.

After moving to the South they told me I didn’t
speak slowly enough.

And though I had a hard time seeing it, each
time I was inspired a little bit more, each

time the accomplishment a little bit sweeter,
each time I turn no into yes, it made me feel

like I had lived a little bit more life than
if I hadn't.

So lesson #6 graduates, do one thing everyday
that scares you, and in the process become

the action hero of your own life.

There is something else that I have learned,
graduates, as I have traveled the world.

I have paid attention, not only to the stories
of people in distant lands, but also the laws

that seemed to govern our collective actions
as human beings, and I know something now

that I would like to share with all of you,
and that is that hopes and dreams and aspirations

are evenly distributed throughout the entire
world, hopes, dreams, and aspirations.

How else could you explain a young girl named
Reshma, I interviewed her in a refugee camp

in Pakistan after the floods, 20% of her homeland
underwater, desperation running high, hardly

any food, thick with misery and chaos, and
I see this young girl sitting in a small tent

doing her schoolwork.

It nearly made me cry.

She wants it even as the laws of the universe
are conspiring against her; hopes, dreams,

and aspirations.

(00:15:10)

A man named Deen in Haiti; I went to visit
him after the earthquake.

I had first met him just after he had both
of his legs amputated.

Come with me, come with me he shouted, and
I watched him walk with his prosthetic legs

over this bumpy Port-au-Prince Road.

He grabbed this transistor radio, turned on
the music, and started to dance in the sunlight.

It was a moment, on his prosthetic legs, he
wasn’t going to just walk, he wasn’t even

going to just run, he was going to dance.

Lesson #7 graduates; hope, dreams, and aspirations,
they are distributed evenly throughout the

entire world, but what is not is justice,
opportunity, and working systems.

There is still too much injustice in the world,
graduates, and I think we all need to spend

more time thinking about it, addressing it
the best that we can, and feeling compelled

to act.

A few years ago I decided that I wanted to
spend my life tipping the scales in favor

of hope, dreams, and aspirations, tipping
the scales, graduates, and I wonder if you

will please help me do that.

Seven lessons graduates, and let me add two
more.

Lesson #8, don’t worry so much about the
future.

Many of you don’t know for sure at 22 what
you really want to do with your life, and

I am still not 100% sure at 42.

Don’t let money dictate your decisions,
and remember what it was that made you happy

before everyone else started trying to define
it for you.

You know what makes your heart swell, you
know what makes your breath catch in your

throat, you know what makes your chest tighten
with anticipation, go get that graduates,

you deserve that.

Also graduates, after today, lesson #9, wake
up with a sense of purpose.

The Japanese call it Ikigai; something to
live for.

Wake up every morning with a plan, a plan
to contribute something to society.

It may be big, it may be small, but make it
count.

A plan to be a better person today, maybe
a better son, a better daughter, a better

spouse, perhaps a better parent, to be better
than you were yesterday.

No days unwasted means having a plan to make
it so.

Also, after today, graduates, especially after
this day, ikigai will also mean being an even

better friend.

Today many of you have to say goodbye.

You have got to say goodbye to this field,
you have got to say goodbye to this big house,

goodbye to this magical place at a truly remarkable
time in your lives.

You don’t get this time back, it's gone,
but the friends that shared this journey with

you are still there, even though you won't
get to see them everyday.

Final lesson then graduates of 2012, lesson
#10, of the few touchstones that you hold

close to your heart, place lifelong friendships
right there at the very top.

Appreciate these friendships, nurture them,
make them grow, and realize that as you get

older, these friendships will become some
of the most valuable things you have in your

life.

Fly around the world graduates for the weddings
of your friends, be there for the births of

their children, and always answer the call
in their times of need.

Thank you so much for having me in your house,
and also in your home!

And when you walk off this field today, you
won't just be graduates, you will also be

champions, you will be the leaders and the
best.

I salute you!

I welcome your commencement into our faithful
Michigan Alumni, and it’s worth saying this

again, graduates, while you may one day forget
this moment, I never ever will.

Go Blue!

Love you!

